We see through the process of light
being transmitted through the eye
to the retina, which converts light
into electrical impulses that are sent to the brain.
The lens of the eye focuses light on the retina.
It is normally clear.
A cataract is a clouding of the lens.
It may be only slight or opaque,
so no light passes through.
Some cataracts develop as part of the aging process.
Proteins that are normally in a precise formation
become clumped, creating clouded areas
that can grow over time.
A so-called senile cataract
often begins as discoloration of the lens
that grows until the lens is opaque.
The lens first swells and then shrinks,
with complete loss of transparency.
A cataract that forms in the center of the lens
can temporarily improve near-sightedness
but this disappears as the cataract worsens.
As cataracts progress,
they can cause blurred or cloudy vision.
Colors can become less bright or yellowed.
It can be harder to see at night.
And light can seem glaring
or there may be a halo around lights.
Steps to improve vision
for early cataracts include new glasses,
brighter lighting,
antiglare sunglasses
and magnifying lenses.
If vision loss interferes with daily activities,
surgery may be recommended.
It is the only effective treatment for cataracts.
Surgery involves removing the cloudy lens
and replacing it with an artificial lens,
which becomes part of your eye.